

=== PAGE 1 ===

Research Paper on
The Contracts for Difference
CAPACITIES FOR AN ENERGY TRANSITION
August 2022

=== PAGE 2 ===

Contents Contents
Abbreviations i
1. Introduction 1
1.1 Background 1
1.2 Content 2
2. The basics of Contracts for Difference and financial energy markets 3
2.1 Contracts for Difference as regulated schemes 5
2.2 Contracts for Difference as generic market products 6
3. Potential applications of Contracts for Difference in a South African context 7
4. Power Purchase Agreements / vesting contracts in South Africa 8
5. Case studies 10
5.1 CfD support schemes for renewable energy: UK and Finland 10
5.2 CfDs as tools in market liberalization: Bulgaria 11
5.3 Vesting contracts for curbing the exercise of market power: Singapore 11
6. Conclusion 12
7. Further reading 13
Appendix I: A practical example of a Contract for Difference 14

=== PAGE 3 ===

Abbreviations
CfD Contract for Difference
CPA Central Purchasing Agency
DAM Day Ahead Market
FiT Feed-in-Tariffs
GIZ Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit
IPP Independent power producer
PPA Power Purchase Agreement
RES Renewable Energy Sources
SAGEN South African-German Energy Programme
Contracts for Difference i

=== PAGE 4 ===

1. Introduction
1.1 Background
The South African–German Energy Programme (SAGEN), funded by the German government
and implemented by the Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ),
was approached by Eskom Transmission to provide further technical assistance and
capacity building for the implementation of reforms in the power sector. This research
paper has been developed under the project “Capacities for an Energy Transition” as an
input to the power sector reform process, where the use of Contract for Difference is part of
the planned implementation of the Central Purchasing Agency (CPA). Separate documents
outline the overall expected high-level market design for South-Africa and the functions
of the CPA. It is beneficial for readers of this document to also read these papers, as they
are interlinked and provide insight into key aspects of how the future electricity market in
South Africa could work. This report was prepared by Hans-Arild Bredesen from Bredesen
Consulting, acting as a sub-contractor to Nord Pool Consulting.
Contact
Questions and comments on this Report can be directed to:
Hans-Arild Bredesen
Team Leader
E: hans-arild.bredesen@bredesenconsulting.com
Contracts for Difference 1

=== PAGE 5 ===

1.2 Content
This research paper presents the underlying concepts and selected international
examples of the use of a Contract for Difference (CfD) to support policy objectives, more
specifically as:
a) a financial mechanism
b) a transitional measure
c) a support mechanism, or
d) a hedging tool.
CfDs have many use cases in electricity markets such as incentivising investment to new
production, for example, Feed-in-Tariffs (FiT) or similar; curbing the exercise of market power,
for example, Singapore vesting contracts; and as a support mechanism for market reform. A
significant positive effect of CfDs is the increased liquidity in the underlying physical short-
term market by switching bilateral physical arrangements into the market. CfDs are also
used to control risk; hedge electricity prices, for example, when introducing a wholesale
market; and to support existing generation capacity. CfDs could therefore have significant
potential use in the South African context.
Contracts for Difference 2

=== PAGE 6 ===

2. The basics of Contracts for
Difference and financial
energy markets
To understand the function of a Contract for Difference within an energy context, one must
first make the distinction between a physical energy market / contract and a financial
energy market / contract. In a physical energy market, such as a Day Ahead and intraday
energy market, trading entails a commitment for the delivery and consumption of electricity.
Generators enter bids for the volume of electricity they are willing to produce at a certain
price and consumers enter bids as to how much they are willing to pay for a specified
amount of electricity. A co-optimisation algorithm is then used to match generators and
consumers, thereby determining a market price at which the electricity is sold. (For more
details on these market mechanisms please see the Eskom Transmission research paper
entitled “The South African Electricity Market”).
In a financial energy market, parties do not have to hold or trade the underlying physical
commodity itself (in this case electricity), but rather trade based on the changing value
of the underlying commodity (the derivative) using the physical energy market as the
reference point. A financial energy market thus functions in much the same way as a stock
market. CfDs have a long history as a mechanism of trading in financial markets. A CfD is
a financial derivative contract between two parties, where the parties settle based on the
price difference between an agreed upon price (strike price) and the underlying market
price in the reference market (reference price).
This type of contract can be implemented as an agreement between
•
two market participants (on a bilateral basis as a substitute for a physical
bilateral contract)
•
a market participant and a central counterparty / marketplace, or
•
two market participants via a central counterparty / marketplace.
A common setup in energy transitions and government subsidy schemes is a central
counterparty such as a government agency or a government fund acting as the counterparty
to the CfD. This allows the other party to the contract to reduce exposure to the volatility of
energy prices in short-term physical market(s).
There are two categories of CfDs: two-way and one-way CfDs. A two-way CfD is a contract
where the direction of payments within the CfD depends on whether the difference
between the strike price and reference price is negative or positive. The effect is that in all
circumstances, both the buyer and seller will pay or get paid the strike price. In practical
terms, the parties to the CfD effectively agree on the strike price as the price to be paid
Contracts for Difference 3

=== PAGE 7 ===

Figure 1. Example of payments under a CfD
for the specified volume of the underlying entity within the contract. The effective outcome
of CfDs is that after both the physical wholesale market and the CfD contract are settled,
the combined amount both parties have paid / have been paid adds up to the strike price
multiplied by the agreed volume. Such a mechanism creates security and stability in the
form of a long-term fixed energy price for both parties, while increasing liquidity due to
their participation in the short-term physical wholesale market. This is the most common
implementation of CfDs and there are many examples of the implementation of financial
derivative markets for electricity, where these contracts are offered as standardised
products to trade.
By comparison, in a one-way CfD payments are one-directional and in the case of the
reference price being higher than the strike price, no payments are made. This ensures a
minimum price for the seller and allows it to keep its profit if the reference price is higher
than the strike price. As an example, in a certain support scheme for renewable energy
sources (RES), a generator benefits if the market price exceeds the strike price.
Price
Price
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
Hour
Two-way CfD
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
Hour
One-way CfD
Generator income from market
Shortfall covered by CfD
Generator payback under CID
Strike price
Market price
Figure 1. Example of payments under a CID
Figure 1 illustrates how the payments in these two types of CfDs will be facilitated from
the point of view of a generation company. The left side diagram of the figure presents a
scenario with a two-way CfD. In this scenario, if the market price is lower than the strike price
Contracts for Difference 4

=== PAGE 8 ===

(hours 1–3 and 7), the generator receives income from the market (dark blue) according
to the market price (lime green), and the CfD counterparty pays the generator for the
difference between the strike price (yellow) and the market price (dark green). If the market
price is above the strike price (hours 4 and 5), the generator must pay back the difference
between the strike price and the market price. If the market closing price is equal to the
strike price, no payments outside of the market are made (hour 6). Appendix 1 presents a
practical numerical example of how the turnover from a two-way CfD would be calculated
compared to a Power Purchase Agreement (PPA).
The right-hand-side diagram in Figure 1 presents a one-way CfD, where the difference to
a two-way CfD is that when the market price exceeds the strike price, the generator gets
to keep this difference between strike price and market price as extra revenue from the
wholesale market. It should be noted that CfDs can be settled either at the same time
resolution as the underlying market or less frequently and based on either hourly market
prices or average prices. In the examples of Figure 1 the settlement is on hourly market
prices.
2.1 Contracts for Difference as regulated
schemes
The length of CfD regulated schemes can vary greatly. Support schemes for renewable
energy generally last from 10 to 20 years. In some cases, support schemes may be tied
to regular (for example, biannual) reviews, where the regulator determines if the CfD is still
appropriate based on new developments in the market. A CfD can cover a specified amount
of energy produced or consumed, or all the energy the generator is able to produce. In
transitory measures for market deregulation and energy transitions, the CfD might be tailored
so that the energy contracted decreases annually to give the parties a smooth transition into
a fully competitive market and pricing.
Depending on the purpose of the CfD, there are several ways the strike price can be set
or agreed upon. A government can administratively determine a strike price based on
benchmark values such as an estimated cost of new electricity generation and the price
of carbon emissions. Arranging an auction to get the best competitive strike price is also
common in schemes that are intended to incentivise new capacity. Alternatively, the parties
to a bilateral CfD can agree on a price based on their expectation of future developments
in the market price.
CfDs are an effective way to move trade from bilateral physical contracts onto a short-term
wholesale physical market. Typically, when introducing CfD schemes to support market
opening, some concerns are raised as to whether the contracted parties distort the market
with the guaranteed price from the CfD (which might be seen to disincentivise bidding in a
competitive way). Despite CfD covered generators being compensated for their production,
there are several reasons why the incentive to bid competitively still exists.
Contracts for Difference 5

=== PAGE 9 ===

Firstly, the CfD premium will cover only the shortfall between the market price and strike
price. In other words, in a case where a CfD covered generator bids an artificially low price,
they would get compensated based only on the overall market closing price and thus
wouldn’t gain from bidding artificially low (or high). Secondly, in competitive power markets
the generators always aim to maximise their profits. Bidding on artificially high prices might
result in the generator not being scheduled, missing any profit from that day. Thirdly, and
most importantly, bidding at a considerably lower price level than what is justified, without
a clear need to do so, amounts to market manipulation, which is prohibited in market rules.
2.2 Contracts for Difference as generic market
products
The implementation of a financial electricity derivatives market is well-used and proven
internationally. The main purpose of this is to allow buyers and sellers to hedge their price
risk in the short-term physical market. In short-term physical wholesale markets, the goal is
to produce marginal prices based on choosing the cheapest generation resources to meet
the demand. Based on this, the short-term physical wholesale market normally produces
a volatile short-term electricity price (reference price) which represents the underlying
situation in the power system hour by hour. The benefit of a volatile reference price is that it
creates incentives for investing in new production or transmission in areas with high prices
or where access to cheap electricity is limited (often called a price signal). The downside
of volatile prices is that they cause significant uncertainty and risk for market participants
and investors in terms of their return on investment. An electricity derivate market can be
introduced as a means to manage this price risk and provide hedging opportunities. This
is typically implemented as an open marketplace with a central counterpart or as pure
bilateral arrangements.
Contracts for Difference 6

=== PAGE 10 ===

3. Potential applications of
Contracts for Difference in
a South African context
CfDs are used for various purposes, and the design parameters of the contracts can be
tailored to suit policy needs. Table 1 presents various common applications of CfDs.
Table 1. Different applications of Contracts for Difference
Application Explanation Main benefit
Tool used by
government in energy
market liberalisation
When a wholesale electricity market is newly
established, CfDs can be set up solely for the
purpose of hedging the prices for an initial period
for the generators and retailers who are not yet
accustomed to the mechanics of the wholesale
market. When imposed at the time of deregulation
or transition, this is often referred to as vesting
contracts.
Introducing participants to
the market without exposing
them to the full risk of volatile
prices from the start, while
retaining price signal from the
market
Tool used by
government
to incentivise
investment
into desirable
technologies
Emergent technologies are typically more
expensive as the value chain is not yet fully
developed. Many renewable energy support
schemes around the world rely on CfDs or similar
mechanisms to guarantee prices for newly installed
renewable energy capacity.
Incentivising investment into
desirable technologies and
increasing market liquidity
Curbing the exercise
of market power
A government can enforce mandatory CfD schemes
on dominant market participants, to reduce their
market power. Guaranteeing a price with a CfD,
for a certain amount of production during scarce
supply, will discourage a producer from misusing
its market power, to withhold capacity.
Reducing incentives to use
market power
Replacing physical
bilateral contracts
A CfD can be used instead of a physical bilateral
contract. Instead of paying an agreed upon price for
an agreed upon volume of electricity, the parties to
the contract sell and procure their electricity on the
organised markets, with the CfD providing financial
certainty.
Increasing market liquidity,
introducing participants to the
market without exposing them
to the full risk of volatile prices
from the start, revealing the
marginal price of the system
Contracts for Difference 7

=== PAGE 11 ===

4. Power Purchase Agreements /
vesting contracts in
South Africa
South Africa is currently aiming to create a new scheme where a CPA is established as a
market support entity. The CPA will then be the counterpart to PPAs signed with Eskom
Generation’s power plants. This structure of the proposed PPAs is illustrated in Figure 2.
Wholesale, cost
reflective
electricity prices
Volumes sold
based on energy
+ reserve capacity hedge
Volumes sold on the market
Capacity payment + payment for additional
ancillary services
Regulated phase Transition phase Market phase
Figure 2. South African Power Purchase Agreement / vesting contract scheme
One main difference to the other international examples provided here is that this scheme
has a physical part through capacity payments. The PPAs (vesting contracts) consist of
three integral parts:
1. Capacity payment. This part will be applicable to the PPA holder for the
lifetime of the plant. Based on the contract specifics, the contracted power
station is paid for available capacity for each hour of the month. The
available capacity is then declared in the Day Ahead Market (DAM). The
CPA will pay for the declared available capacity at an availability rate that
is calculated based on predetermined formula, and takes into account
capital recovery, annual fixed maintenance recovery, annual fixed operating
cost and effective availability. Penalty rates will apply when the contracted
power station does not have a metered availability equal to their declared
availability.
Contracts for Difference 8

=== PAGE 12 ===

2. Ancillary services capacity payment. This part will cover ancillary services
such as starting a unit without external grid support (black starting),
continuing to power an area without external grid support (islanding) and
voltage regulation. Ancillary service terms in the contract may not apply
for the full life of plant. Some of the payments may apply to technical
adjustments or investments made to the plant and would incorporate a
longer term pay-back (for example, islanding and black starting) whereas
others could be more dynamic and have an initial capacity component that
terminates before the contract expiry.
3. Energy hedge. Generally, the energy production is expected in the long
run to be compensated in the DAM. However, in the medium term it is
expected that specified volumes will be hedged against an average energy
rate applicable in the year. This energy rate should cover the fuel costs
of the generator as well as variable operations and management costs.
The volumes associated with the hedge shall reduce annually, allowing
for gradual exposure for the power stations to market prices. Participation
in the market, as well as the price that is offered into the market, are
requirements of the PPA. These prices should reflect the average energy
rate for the year, allowing for a cone of 15% deviation to accommodate
short-term changes in incremental cost.
For more information, please read the Eskom Transmission research paper entitled “The
Role of the Central Purchasing Agency”.
Contracts for Difference 9

=== PAGE 13 ===

5. Case studies
5.1 CfD support schemes for renewable
energy: UK and Finland
The main mechanism of the UK government for renewable energy support is a CfD support
scheme that is targeted at supporting low carbon energy project implementation. The UK
CfD is a contract between a low carbon electricity generator and the government-owned
Low Carbon Contracts Company (LCCC) and is a textbook example of a renewable energy
support scheme. The UK CfD requires the generators to sell their energy to the wholesale
market and offers a guaranteed price for 15 years. The strike price is determined in an auction
where the prospective generators bid their strike price and compete for the contracts. The
UK CfD is a two-way contract, therefore when the market price exceeds the strike price, the
generator is required to pay back the difference. CfDs are awarded under the scheme in
auctions, held in periodical allocation rounds, where a number of projects that fit in a pre-
determined budget are accepted. Four allocation rounds have been completed to date,
with the latest ending in July 2022. Prior to the fourth round, the scheme had supported
projects of differing low-carbon technologies totalling to 15,5 GW. The budget for the CfD
scheme is funded by payments from electricity suppliers under a CfD Supplier Obligation
Levy. The levy is two-way in the same sense as a CfD: if the reference price is higher than
the strike price, Low Carbon Contracts Company returns payments to suppliers.
The Finnish CfD based Feed-in-Tariff (FiT) support scheme represents a slightly different
approach to support renewable energy sources development. The Finnish scheme was
introduced in 2011 and the issuing of new contracts stopped in 2017 when the limit of
2 500 MW of new wind power projects was reached. The main differences to the UK
CfD are twofold. Firstly, instead of an auction, the strike price was administratively set to
83,5 EUR / MWh for all eligible producers. Secondly, the contract is a one-way type CfD
– if the reference price exceeds the strike price, the generator does not pay back the
difference. Within the Finnish FiT, the producers are paid the difference between the strike
price and the three-month average market price according to the electricity produced.
Energy Authority, the Finnish National Regulatory Authority acts as the counterpart to the
CfD. The contract length is 12 years. The support scheme targeted wind power plants,
biogas plants and wood-based fuel plants that fulfilled certain criteria and was offered to
new projects up to a certain capacity threshold. There is a floor condition to the strike price,
where, if the market price remains under 30 EUR / MWh during the three months settlement
period, the strike price for that period is reduced by 30 EUR to 53,5 EUR / MWh.
Contracts for Difference 10

=== PAGE 14 ===

5.2 CfDs as tools in market liberalization:
Bulgaria
Bulgaria is currently undergoing energy market liberalisation and in a 2016 report the World
Bank recommended CfDs as one of the tools to target specific parts of the electricity sector
to introduce the transition. The main aim of the recommended CfDs is to increase the
liquidity of the Bulgarian Day Ahead wholesale market by integrating independent power
producers into the market. The recommendation includes replacing long-term PPAs, off-
taker agreements, and fixed feed-in tariffs with CfDs that force the producers to trade in
the organised markets, while respecting their earlier contract terms. A stepwise rollout is
recommended, so that the CfDs would be imposed on different producer groups gradually.
The Bulgarian Electricity Security Service fund would act as the counterparty to the CfDs.
The report also proposes that CfDs could act as a support mechanism for liberalising the
regulated sector.
5.3 Vesting contracts for curbing the exercise
of market power: Singapore
The National Electricity Market of Singapore has had a vesting contract scheme in place
since 2004 that applies to both the generation and retail segments. The eligible power
producers are guaranteed a price (vested) for a percentage of their production, and on
the retail side the vesting contracts cover the non-contestable load (meaning not part of
the market) and part of the contestable load (part of the market). The vesting contract is
a two-way CfD issued by the governing body, the Energy Market Authority, covering a
specified quantity of electricity. The quantity allocated follows a calendar that sets a different
hedge proportion or hedge quantity based on the day of the week and the time of day,
to vest more electricity during peak consumption. The purpose of the Singapore vesting
contract scheme is to curb the exercise of market power, more specifically to incentivise
the dominant producers to not artificially increase prices by withholding capacity. The
Energy Market Authority revises the scheme biannually and determines the vesting level
and strike price (vesting price) based on comprehensive reviews. The vesting price is tied
to an administratively calculated Long Run Marginal Cost of the most efficient generation
technology that at the time of the review covered at least 25% of the electricity consumption.
The national market support service company, SP Services, is the counterpart to the CfDs.
The dominant producers see the scheme as financial support to maintain existing capacity,
but the governing body maintains that the purpose is to reduce market power and are
gradually reducing the vesting level.
Contracts for Difference 11

=== PAGE 15 ===

6. Conclusion
In conclusion, CfDs are an extensively used financial tool in which both parties to the
contract agree on a price or a minimum price for a specified volume of the underlying asset
(in this case electricity). The fact that one does not have to physically own the underlying
asset means that the parties can trade on the short-term physical energy market, while
benefiting from the long-term price stability created by the contract. These contracts can
therefore be used to create desirable market conditions such as increased liquidity on the
short-term physical energy market and investment in new capacity when price signals are
insufficient to meet system needs.
Contracts for Difference 12

=== PAGE 16 ===

7. Further reading
Contracts for Difference (n.d.) What is the Contracts for Difference Scheme? Available at:
https://www.cfdallocationround.uk/about
DMRE (Department of Mineral Resources and Energy) (2022) Electricity Regulation
Amendment Bill. Government Gazette 45898, 10 February. Available at:
https://www.gov.za/sites/default/files/gcis_document/202203/45898gon1746.pdf
DMRE (2022) Electricity Pricing Policy Review. Government Gazette 45899, 10 February.
Available at:
https://www.gov.za/sites/default/files/gcis_document/202203/45899gon1747.pdf
DPE (Department of Public Enterprises) (2019) Roadmap for Eskom in a Reformed Electricity
Supply Industry. Available at:
https://www.gov.za/sites/default/files/gcis_document/201910/roadmap-eskom.pdf
Energy Market Authority of Singapore: Vesting Contracts. Available at:
https://www.ema.gov.sg/Licensees_Electricity_Vesting_Contracts.aspx
Open Electricity Market (n.d.) Understanding Vesting Contract Calculations. Available at:
https://www.openelectricitymarket.sg/business/resources/vesting-contracts/
understanding-vesting-contract-calculations
The World Bank (2016) Bulgaria Power Sector: Making the Transition to Financial Recovery
and Market Liberalization Summary Report: Reimbursable Technical Assistance.
Available at: https://www.me.government.bg/files/useruploads/files/wb_ras_i__
summary_report_en.pdf
Contracts for Difference 13

=== PAGE 17 ===

Appendix I: A practical example
of a Contract for Difference
In this practical example, we compare the turnover of an Independent Power Producer
under a PPA and a CfD for 24 hours. In the example, both the PPA contract price and the
strike price of the CfD are 52€ / MWh and cover a volume of electricity of 7 MW. The Day
Ahead Market (DAM) price fluctuates during the day. The price difference between the
strike price and the DAM price is calculated as follows
While the turnover is calculated as
Price difference = Strike price – DAM price
While turnover is calculated as
Turnover = Price × volume × time
€ =
€
MWh
× MW × h
Table 2 indicates the resultant turnover for the DAM, CfD and PPA.
Table 2. Sample prices for a Power Purchase Agreement versus Contract for Difference
Hour Strike
price
DAM
price
Price
Difference
Volume Turnover
in DAM
CfD
Transfer
Turnover
with CfD
Turnover
with PPA
Units € /
MWh
€ /
MWh
€ /
MWh
MW € € € €
1 52 26,87 25,13 7 188,09 175,91 364 364
2 52 26,97 25,03 7 188,79 175,21 364 364
3 52 26,8 25,2 7 187,6 176,4 364 364
4 52 26,17 25,83 7 183,19 180,81 364 364
5 52 27,3 24,7 7 191,1 172,9 364 364
6 52 28,22 23,78 7 197,54 166,46 364 364
7 52 38,75 13,25 7 271,25 92,75 364 364
8 52 51,31 0,69 7 359,17 4,83 364 364
9 52 54,05 -2,05 7 378,35 -14,35 364 364
10 52 50,24 1,76 7 351,68 12,32 364 364
11 52 45,2 6,8 7 316,4 47,6 364 364
12 52 46,01 5,99 7 322,07 41,93 364 364
Hour Strike
price
DAM
price
Price
Difference
Volume Turnover
in DAM
CfD
Transfer
Turnover
with CfD
Turnover
with PPA
Contracts for Difference 14

=== PAGE 18 ===

Units € /
MWh
€ /
MWh
€ /
MWh
MW € € € €
13 52 41,47 10,53 7 290,29 73,71 364 364
14 52 42,9 9,1 7 300,3 63,7 364 364
15 52 44,9 7,1 7 314,3 49,7 364 364
16 52 49,72 2,28 7 348,04 15,96 364 364
17 52 60,07 -8,07 7 420,49 -56,49 364 364
18 52 71,45 -19,45 7 500,15 -136,15 364 364
19 52 67,87 -15,87 7 475,09 -111,09 364 364
20 52 52,85 -0,85 7 369,95 -5,95 364 364
21 52 42,5 9,5 7 297,5 66,5 364 364
22 52 37,62 14,38 7 263,34 100,66 364 364
23 52 32,95 19,05 7 230,65 133,35 364 364
24 52 29,24 22,76 7 204,68 159,32 364 364
The money transfer required by the CfD is calculated based on the price difference.
•
When the DAM price is below the strike price, the independent power producer (IPP)
gets paid less in the DAM compared to the PPA. Thus, the CfD pays the difference
needed to cover the shortfall.
•
When the DAM price is above the strike price, the IPP gets paid more in the DAM
compared to the PPA. Thus, the IPP has pay to back to the CfD counterpart the
difference to compensate this.
The CfD transfer is calculated as CfD transfer = Price difference × volume × time
The total net turnover will be the sum of the revenue received from the DAM and the
money transfer carried out with the CfD counterparties.
Turnover with PPA = Turnover in DAM + CfD transfer
The conclusion to this example is that for all hours the total turnover of the CfD is exactly
the same as the turnover of the PPA.
Contracts for Difference 15