

=== PAGE 1 ===

Research Paper on
The South African
Electricity Market
CAPACITIES FOR AN ENERGY TRANSITION
August 2022

=== PAGE 2 ===

Contents
Abbreviations i
1. Introduction 1
1.1 Background 1
1.2 Content 2
2. The South African electricity supply industry 3
3. Market concepts 5
3.1 Day Ahead and intraday markets 7
3.2 Balance responsibility and ancillary services 9
3.3 Co-optimisation of energy and reserves 9
4. Central Purchasing Agency 11
5. Governance and regulatory structures 13
6. International trade 14
7. Conclusion 16
8. Further reading 17

=== PAGE 3 ===

Abbreviations
BRP Balance responsible party
CPA Central Purchasing Agency
DMRE Department of Mineral Resources and Energy
ESI Electricity Supply Industry
IPP Independent power producer
NERSA National Energy Regulator of South Africa
PPA Power Purchase Agreements
SAPP Southern African Power Pool
SMP System marginal price
TSMO Transmission System and Market Operator
The South African Electricity Market i

=== PAGE 4 ===

1. Introduction
1.1 Background
The South African-German Energy Programme (SAGEN), funded by the German government
and implemented by the Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ),
was approached by Eskom Transmission to provide further technical assistance and
capacity building for the implementation of reforms in the power sector. This research paper
has been developed under the project “Capacities for an Energy Transition” as an input to
the power sector reform process. It serves as a high-level description of the market model
and describes the various market segments and how the market is intended to work. The
two other research papers created under this support project give further details on the
role of the Central Purchasing Agency (CPA) within the South African market and the use
of Contracts for Difference within the industry. It is beneficial for readers of this document
to also read these papers as they are interlinked and provide insight into key aspects of
how the future electricity market in South Africa could work. This report was prepared by
Hans-Arild Bredesen from Bredesen Consulting acting as a sub-contractor to Nord Pool
Consulting.
Contact
Questions and comments on this Report can be directed to:
Hans-Arild Bredesen
Team Leader
E: hans-arild.bredesen@bredesenconsulting.com
The South African Electricity Market 1

=== PAGE 5 ===

1.2 Content
This research paper presents the underlying concepts of the market model, more
specifically as:
a) The South African electricity supply industry
b) Market concept and the key market features
c) Regulatory structures
d) International markets
The description is based on the existing presentations of the current model as well as
the ongoing development of the future South African Market Code. This code (under
development) shall become the regulation document for the South African market model.
Disclaimer: The development of the South African Market Code is a work in
progress where the described market model, including the detailed rules, are
being developed in parallel to this paper (and will continue to evolve over time).
The final market model will also be influenced by the final changes to the Energy
Regulation Amendment Bill (ERA) and potentially other governmental decisions.
The South African Electricity Market 2

=== PAGE 6 ===

2. The South African electricity
supply industry
The South African government has outlined its intention to move to a competitive electricity
market, eventually allowing all consumers choice of electricity supplier. The transition to a
competitive market model will be based on a stepwise implementation of various market
segments, as well as a phased introduction of participants to the South African power
market. To understand the processes required within an electricity market, it is valuable to
outline the relevant stakeholders and how they participate in the industry. Figure 1 shows a
schematic of an electricity supply industry (ESI) with a competitive market.
Eskom is currently structured as a vertically integrated, state-owned enterprise but is
in the process of unbundling into separate generation, transmission and distribution
entities. The unbundling does not necessarily mean full legal separation but will at least
incorporate functional unbundling. Approximately 95% of the electricity produced in South
Africa is currently produced by Eskom Generation, primarily through coal-fired thermal
power stations. Additional capacity produced by independent power producers (IPPs)
is purchased by Eskom through contracts in the form of Power Purchase Agreements
(PPAs), which specify the price at which electricity will be bought for a set number of years
through a single buyer. The requirements for additional power are based on a ministerial
determination by the Department of Mineral Resources and Energy (DMRE) in line with the
Integrated Resource Plans of 2010 and 2019. In contrast to a centrally planned environment,
a competitive environment will allow eligible IPPs to enter the market as they choose, with
price signals determining when new capacity is created; if investors think that they will
make a profit selling electricity they invest in new generation facilities.
The South African Electricity Market 3

=== PAGE 7 ===

Contract price
Contract price
Brokers, traders, retailers
Market price
Market price
Market price
Market operator
Market price (used in settlement)
PPA Contract price
PPA Contract price
Central
purchasing agency
Use-of-system
charges
Use-of-system
charges
Households
ESKOM Gx
System operator
Legacy IPPs Communities/
businesses
Transmission Distribution
New IPPs
Bilateral agreements –
contract price
Power intensive
users
Flow of money, determined by the market
Flow of money, determined by the contracts
Flow of electricity
Generators
Consumers
Figure 1. Participants in the South African electricity supply industry
Where these market mechanisms are deemed to be insufficient to ensure security of supply,
contracts can be entered into with a special purpose vehicle called the Central Purchasing
Agency (CPA), which performs a supporting role within the market (detailed in Section 5).
The South African Electricity Market 4

=== PAGE 8 ===

While competition will be allowed between generators, the transmission and distribution
networks must be operated and regulated as monopolies independent of the market. This
is because access to these networks is required by all participants and therefore non-
discriminatory third-party access must be ensured as a prerequisite to competition. To cover
the costs of owning, operating and expanding the network, an unbundled use-of-system
tariff (sometimes referred to as a wheeling tariff) is applied to all electricity transferred
on the network. This charge is paid to the System Operator, who is responsible for the
metering of all market participants, the real-time balancing of supply and demand on the
integrated power system and the iswsuing of dispatch instructions. In a competitive market
environment, the System Operator will use trades reported from the Market Operator to
manage the real-time processes required for the physical balance of the power system.
The consumers (often represented by traders, brokers and/or resellers) will buy electricity
from a chosen supplier that will utilise the various trading opportunities through the markets
to buy the required electricity to meet the requirements from the consumers. The Market
Operator is the body responsible for managing the markets created to facilitate this choice
and for ensuring that financial settlements between buyers and sellers are settled in a
transparent manner.
3. Market concepts
In a perfectly balanced system, the amount of electricity produced equates to the amount
of electricity consumed at any given time. The benefit of a market is not only that it allows
consumers to choose products that best suit them but that in doing so, this system balance
occurs at a price that is acceptable to everyone (defined as market clearing).
Given the coordination required to achieve this balance, different market mechanisms are
used to facilitate it. These include market platforms in which:
a) predicted supply and demand are traded by participants ahead of time, to allow for
system planning and coordination = short-term physical markets such as the Day
Ahead markets and in the future, intraday markets
b) any imbalances created due to the difference between real and predicted supply
and demand are reconciled to ensure system security = balance responsibility,
reserve markets and ancillary services.
c) contracts can be entered into to provide capacity for longer term supply security =
capacity remuneration schemes
d) the market model allows for longer-term bilateral trades (both physical and
financial) to be traded directly between a buyer and seller outside the short-term
physical markets to allow for hedging against price risk.
The South African Electricity Market 5

=== PAGE 9 ===

The short-term physical energy market, where electricity is paid for as consumed, consists
of a commitment to the delivery and consumption of power. A future financial energy
market allows for trading to occur on contracts, with an underlying reference to the short-
term market. This market can be used for derivative trading, to support risk management
strategies by participants. (For more details on these contracts please see the Eskom
Transmission research paper entitled “Contracts for Difference”).
Eskom has already established the Eskom Dynamic Energy Market (EDEM), which can form
the basis of the required platforms for a competitive electricity market. These platforms,
operated by the Transmission Market Operator are illustrated in Figure 2.
Energy market
(Day ahead)
Carried across
wires today
Energy reserve market
(Day ahead reserve)
Available but held
back for reserve
margin
Capacity market
Firm power can be
called on when needed
Balancing market
Real time delivery
of power
Other services
Anything that can
manage supply/demand
in real time
Ancillary services
Network support
services
Figure 2. Overview of Eskom’s Dynamic Energy Market (EDEM) model
Eligible buyers and sellers are also able to conclude physical and financial bilateral contracts
outside this market. The physical contracts, incorporating the commitment for delivery and
consumption of power, will result in declarations to the Market Operator by the end of each
day’s trading on the Day Ahead market (gate closure). Intraday variations will be permitted
as approved by the System Operator (after accounting for network constraints).
The South African Electricity Market 6

=== PAGE 10 ===

3.1 Day Ahead and intraday markets
A Day Ahead market is normally where most energy is traded. As the name suggests, the
Day Ahead market is run one day ahead of real time and attempts to establish a provisional
hour-by-hour balance between electricity supply and consumption. Generators submit
a bid to the Market Operator for each of their power producing units, declaring their
capacity, availability and price for each hour of the following day. These unit-based bids
are referred to as complex orders, as they include technical parameters (start-up or shut-
down times, how fast a unit can change its output, minimum generation) and the prices
associated with production as a capacity-dependent curve. Retailers, brokers and traders
representing the consumers (households, businesses and power-intensive industries)
submit their predicted consumption levels per hour as demand orders to the Market
Operator. Once generators have offered their capacity, expressed with different volumes
at different prices, and consumers have indicated their willingness to pay for energy at a
set of given prices, the Market Operator matches generators and consumers on an hour-
by-hour basis. Matching generators and consumers in this way results in a provisional
balance point, as indicated in Figure 3, at which electricity is sold at a system marginal
price (SMP) for all parties. The power generation units are activated in an ascending order
of their respective offer price, and as a result, the most economically efficient production
units will be chosen first (energy optimisation).
Price (EUR/MWh)
Supply
System
Marginal
Price
Demand
Turnover
Volume (MWh)
Figure 3. System Marginal Price and power volumes
for both supply and demand curves
The South African Electricity Market 7

=== PAGE 11 ===

This initial market balance point is an unconstrained result, independent of any physical
network constraints. However, the inclusion of network constraints is necessary to ensure
the physical viability of the dispatch orders. Therefore, the volumes of power to be produced
by each generator are recalculated to incorporate network constraints (called a constrained
result). If a party’s unconstrained schedule is reduced due to this re-calculation, it will be
allowed to keep its “lost opportunity payment” for the constrained volume.
Example to demonstrate lost opportunity payment
a) A generator offers a generating unit at a price of R500 for a given hour.
b) The unconstrained market result is that this generator should produce 50 MWh
at a SMP of R700.
c) However, due to network constraints, its production schedule is reduced to 45
MWh.
The generator’s financial settlement for that specific hour would then be:
Total payment = production payment + lost opportunity payment
= (electricity produced SMP) + (lost opportunity generator
offer price)
Total payment = (45 MWh R700) + [(50MWh – 45MWh) (R700 – R500)]
= R31 500 + R1 000
= R32 500
The constrained result is then used by the System Operator to formulate dispatch
instructions for the next day. In addition to a Day Ahead market, in the future, intraday
markets can be used throughout the day to balance production and consumption. These
markets function in the same way as Day Ahead markets but within a shorter timeframe (for
example, auctions take place every four hours). However, the shorter time frames do create
more onerous requirements and, while there is an ambition to create this type of market in
the future, it will not be created within the initial model.
The South African Electricity Market 8

=== PAGE 12 ===

3.2 Balance responsibility and ancillary
services
If all parties adhere to their predicted production and consumption, the system remains
in balance. However, there are inevitably deviations from predicted production and con-
sumption and these imbalances are addressed through balance responsibility, Day Ahead
reserve markets and ancillary services.
Balance responsibility is defined as a participant’s obligation to pay the costs associated
with any imbalance caused due to the difference between real and predicted supply or
demand; if a generator produces less power than predicted or consumers consume more
power than predicted, the participant is required to pay the costs associated with procuring
additional power and coordinating the balancing of the system in real time.
The power required to balance the system in real time can be procured through ancillary
services and Day Ahead reserve markets, where generators declare that they are available
at specified times to produce a certain amount of power, if there is a shortfall. These
generators are compensated both for making themselves available on standby and for any
electricity produced during this timeframe. Due to the higher dispatchability and system
coordination requirement for this type of generation, the price of electricity on this market
is also higher; a cost that is borne by the balance responsible party (BRP). Consumers can
also declare that they are available at specified times to reduce consumption by a specified
amount (demand response), for which they will be compensated for. The requirement for
the amounts and types of reserves is a calculation that is done by the System Operator
to ensure system security (reserve optimisation). The Market Operator is responsible
for procuring these ancillary services on behalf of the System Operator. These balancing
mechanisms create a cost incentive for all parties to predict and declare their power
production or requirements accurately and adhere to their predictions.
3.3 Co-optimisation of energy and
reserves
To facilitate the trading for each market, the Market Operator uses individual unit-based
complex orders from BRPs (on both the consumption and generation side) in different
markets, to optimise for both cost and system security. This is split into two main processes:
Energy optimisation and reserve optimisation. The energy optimisation, represented by
the energy balance between supply and demand is solved using the Day Ahead and
future intraday markets, while the reserve optimisation, according to the System Operator’s
requirements, is solved in the reserve market.
The South African Electricity Market 9

=== PAGE 13 ===

Both the energy and reserves optimisations are solved in one algorithm. This algorithm will
be run by the Market Operator, using the same unit-based complex orders on both markets.
The algorithm will calculate the optimal results for both the energy balance between supply
and demand, and the System Operator’s requirement for reserves as part of one process.
Thereby the name co-optimisation, as it optimises both the energy balance and the reserve
requirement as part of one process or algorithm. This co-optimisation is one of the key
features that distinguishes the proposed South African market model from, for example, its
European counterpart.
Example to demonstrate co-optimisation
This is a simplified example based on one inflexible demand-side requirement
of 600 MW and one reserve requirement (in reality, there will be three) from the
System Operator of 150 MW. There are no network constraints in this example.
Three generating units (GU) with the following (simplified) parameters are offered
to the market:
GU1 (1) 300 MW, priced at R400/MW, non-flexible
(2) 100 MW, priced at R500/MW, flexible
GU2 (1) 100 MW, priced at R600/MW, flexible
GU3 (1) 200 MW, priced at R550/MW, non-flexible
(2) 100 MW, priced at R700/MW, flexible
If you do a pure energy market calculation, the result would be:
GU 1: All its output would be taken (400 MW),
GU 2: None of its output would be taken,
GU 3: 200 MW would be taken (Order 1),
and the SMP would be R550 (the price of the last unit used in a merit-order
selection).
However, the co-optimisation will also need to consider the reserve requirement
from the SO.
The South African Electricity Market 10

=== PAGE 14 ===

Based on the orders on the previous page, the selection process would therefore be:
Reserves (this requires flexible generation):
GU 1: 100 MW from Order (2)
GU 2: 50 MW from Order (1)
Energy (both flexible and non-flexible generation can be used):
GU 1: 300 MW from Order (1)
GU 2: 50 MW of its Order (1) (remaining after reserve selection)
GU 3: 200 MW of its Order (1) and 50 MW of Order (2)
Resulting in a SMP for energy of R700/MW (the price of the last unit used in a
merit-order selection) and a SMP for reserves of R300/MW (based on the lost
opportunity cost from being kept outside the energy market calculated as the
difference between the lowest cost offered – R400 for order 1 for GU 1 and the SMP –
calculated at R700/MW).
Payments would then end up as:
GU1 Energy 300 MW * R700 = R210.000
Reserve 100 MW * R400 = R40 000
GU2 Energy 50 MW * R700 = R35 000
Reserve 50 MW * R400 = R20 000
GU3 Energy 250 MW * R700 = R175 000
No reserve payment
4. Central Purchasing Agency
A Central Purchasing Agency (CPA) is a market support entity that will be created to fulfil
the role of counterpart to contracts necessary to facilitate the transition to a competitive
market as well as a special purpose vehicle managing non-market agreements or services
aligned with the competitive market.
It will be financially responsible for the existing Power Purchase Agreements with IPPs
(legacy contracts) and will participate as a balance responsible party in the market for the
electricity produced under these agreements. It can also enter into new PPAs with IPPs to
enhance system stability.
The South African Electricity Market 11

=== PAGE 15 ===

In addition to contracts with IPPs, the CPA will serve as the financial counterpart for electricity
generated by Eskom Generation (vesting contracts). These contracts are signed with each
power plant and typically consist of two parts; the first applied over the lifetime of the plant
and the second expiring over time. The first section specifies an agreed upon payment
to cover the fixed capital, operational and maintenance costs required by the plant and
special ancillary services such as black starting and islanding. The second section specifies
a fixed energy and reserve capacity price (hedge price) to be applied at the start of the
contract and the process by which this fixed price will gradually transition to the market
price over time. When applying a hedge price, power is first bought or sold in a competitive
market then hedged back to the agreed upon fixed price. Eskom Generation will be the
BRP for all its generation. (For more details on the CPA please refer to Eskom Transmission
research paper entitled “The Role of the Central Purchasing Agency”.)
Balance Responsible Parties (Generators, Retailers, Traders, Consumers)
Central purchasing agency
Market Operator
System Operator
Availability
payment
(capacity)
Energy hedge
(Energy)
Day-ahead
(Energy)
(future)
Intraday
(Energy)
Day-ahead
Reserves
(Capacity)
Balancing
activations
(Energy)
Ancillary
services
Common financial settlement services
Balance Responsible Parties (Generators, Retailers, Traders, Consumers)
Figure 4. Organisational aspects of the market model
Figure 4 illustrates the resultant organisational aspects of the market model. The existing
Eskom Dynamic Energy Market and PPAs form part of a regulatory “sandbox” environment.
This means that the market is already being used as designed, with prices determined
according to the market. Similarly, the PPAs with Eskom Generation and Eskom Distribution
are applied as per the agreed calculations and principles in these contracts. However,
once these payments are determined according to the market, they are hedged back to a
regulated revenue determination made by the National Energy Regulator of South Africa
(NERSA). The “sandbox” operation means that the parties are not subject to the financial
effect of the payments and charges but are able to learn how these processes will work in
the future market.
The South African Electricity Market 12

=== PAGE 16 ===

Figure 5. Regulatory and legislative environment for the South African
supply industry and market (adapted from the Electricity Pricing Policy)
5. Governance and regulatory
structures
Figure 5 illustrates the regulatory and legislative environment for the South African
electricity supply industry.
National Policy
Papers
Sector Policy
Implementation
Documents
Discussion
Green paper
White paper
e.g. White paper on
Energy Policy
Directions
Principles
Metering
Financial settlement
Dispute settlement
Investigation of
noncompliance
National Parliament
National Executive
DMRE
DMRE
NERSA
Market Operator
System Operator
NERSA
Legislation
Regulations
Bills
Acts
e.g. Electricity
Regulation Act
e.g. National
Energy Act
Licenses
Codes
Rules
Guidelines
Methodologies
e.g. SA Market Code
DMRE
NERSA
DMRE
NERSA
Transmission System
and Market Operator
(TSMO)
Market Committee
Figure 5. Regulatory and legislative environment for the South African electricity
supply industry and market (adapted from the Electricity Pricing Policy)
At the highest level of governance are national documents and discussions by the National
Parliament or the Executive. These address priority multisectoral issues, for example,
the National Development Plan 2030 and State of the Nation addresses. White or green
papers and legislation provide high-level guidance within the sector and are therefore
the responsibility of the Department of Mineral Resources and Energy (DMRE). These
documents include the 1998 “White Paper on the Energy Policy of the Republic of South
The South African Electricity Market 13

=== PAGE 17 ===

Africa”, which introduced several reforms and market liberalisation measures, and the
Electricity Regulation Act 4 of 2006, which is currently being amended to address the
ESI’s market structure, the establishment of a Transmission System Operator and different
stakeholder’s regulatory responsibilities within the reformed sector. The subsequent level
of regulatory framework consists of sector policy and regulations; these are documents with
detailed specifications for how elements of ESI and market would operate. The new South
African Market Code would fit within this level and could be maintained by the Transmission
System and Market Operator (TSMO) as the secretariat. In addition, it is expected that a
Market Committee will be formed by industry stakeholders and ultimately approved by
NERSA. The Market Committee will play a supporting role in maintaining and updating the
market rules. The details of the foundation, rules and operation of this committee shall be
defined in the Market Code.
On an implementation level, the Market Operator is responsible for managing the
markets, balancing mechanism and financial settlements. The System Operator manages
the real-time balancing of supply and demand and performs the function of metering
agent for the Market Operator and market participants. NERSA is responsible for the
settling of disputes and the investigation of alleged discrimination regarding tariffs,
conditions of access, as well as alleged failure to abide by licensing conditions.
6. International trade
In addition to the intra South African markets, the market model also needs to take into
account how trading is conducted in the Southern African Power Pool (SAPP). The
international trade concept is still under development and thus the following presents
the most recent version of the concept. International trade covers both bilateral trading
with the regional counterparts and the trade in the organised markets governed by SAPP.
The objective of the concept is to ensure that the regional trade is performed in such
a manner that it brings benefit to the South African power sector, ensuring participation
based on sound economics.
A generic requirement for all parties that shall be trading on SAPP is that they hold an
export license in South Africa and that they are a market participant in the SAPP markets.
Any party participating or interacting in the SAPP markets will be under SAPP governance
as well as the South African Market Code. The CPA shall manage and maintain the
historical regional bilateral contracts and schedule these according to the SAPP Market
Book of Rules. The following Parties will interact with SAPP markets:
The South African Electricity Market 14

=== PAGE 18 ===

System Operator
•
Provides the available transmission capacities for all international interconnections from
South Africa to the SAPP markets
•
Acts as a Transmission System Operator under the SAPP regulations
•
Nominates the total scheduled flows to the Market Operator
•
Acts as the balance responsible party towards SAPP.
Market Operator
•
Represents (trading proxy) the South African market participants for those volumes that
are traded through the South African market
•
For the Day Ahead market, creates a Net Export Curve representing the aggregated
purchase and sales offers from the orders in the South African Day Ahead market, using
the order information from the different market participants, including adjusting for any
capacity payments
•
For the SAPP intraday and balancing markets, makes available national orders according
to a set of detailed rules
•
Takes the scheduled flows from the SAPP markets as a deemed flow in the market
clearing in the South African market.
South African market participant with a capacity payment agreement
with the CPA
•
Shall always offer their full capability to the national market of South Africa and will not
be allowed to participate directly in the SAPP regional markets
•
Will indirectly be participating through the Market Operator, which will use its orders in
the short-term markets (Day Ahead market, intraday market and balance market) and
thereby have implicit access to the regional markets.
South African market participant without a capacity payment agreement
with the CPA
Has a choice regarding who it will buy from or sell its requirement to in a market, and thus
can buy or sell power through the following channels:
•
A bilateral physical contract with a South African counterpart: In this event, the participant
will have to nominate its planned schedule to the Market Operator to be considered in
the South African market. The bilateral contract will be settled between the parties.
•
A bilateral financial contract with a South African (or regional) counterpart: In this event, it
should participate in the South African market to secure a physical position. This financial
bilateral contract will be settled between the parties.
The South African Electricity Market 15

=== PAGE 19 ===

•
•
•
Subject to being a SAPP market participant: Participate in the SAPP organised physical
markets. If successful, nominate its schedule to the System Operator to be considered
in the management of the transmission capacity towards SAPP. The settlement of this
trade will be towards SAPP.
Participate in the South African short-term physical market as a market participant under
the South African Market Code; or
Any combination of the above.
A regional bilateral physical contract with an international counterpart will not be allowed
in the future.
7. Conclusion
In conclusion, the proposed liberalisation and ongoing unbundling of Eskom represents
a significant change in the historic landscape of the South African ESI. To manage this
transition to a competitive wholesale market, the introduction of market platforms (such as
the Day Ahead, intraday, reserve and ancillary services market) and participants will need
to occur gradually over time. In addition, the Market Operator, System Operator and CPA
will have critical roles to play, to facilitate the functioning of a market.
The South African Electricity Market 16

=== PAGE 20 ===

8. Further reading
DMRE (Department of Mineral Resources and Energy) (2022) Electricity Regulation
Amendment Bill. Government Gazette 45898, 10 February. Available at:
https://www.gov.za/sites/default/files/gcis_document/202203/45898gon1746
DPE (Department of Public Enterprises) (2019) Roadmap for Eskom in a Reformed
Electricity Supply Industry. Available at: https://dpe.gov.za/wp-content/
uploads/2019/10/ROADMAP-FOR-ESKOM_0015_29102019_FINAL1.pdf
The South African Electricity Market 17