

=== PAGE 1 ===

ENERGY COUNCIL OF SOUTH AFRICA 2025
Road to SAWEM 2026
The Role of
Balancing (BRP)
Prepared by:
0

=== PAGE 2 ===

ENERGY COUNCIL OF SOUTH AFRICA 2025
Document Control
Document Title SAWEM Concept Note The Role of a BRP in the Market
Version 1.0
Date of Latest Update 13 June 2025
Prepared by Energy Council of South Africa
Endorsed by NTCSA tbc
Distribution For stakeholder consultation
Document Status Final
1

=== PAGE 3 ===

ENERGY COUNCIL OF SOUTH AFRICA 2025
The Role of a Balance Responsible Party and
Compliance Measures
Balance Responsible Parties (BRPs) play a critical role in energy markets as they are tasked
with maintaining a balance between energy production and consumption within their
contracted scope. This responsibility ensures the stability of the energy grid and the
functionality of market operations.
1. The Role of a BRP in the Market
The System Operator (SO) is ultimate responsibility for maintaining real-time balancing of the
electricity system through the use of contracted ancillary services. Embedded generators can
cause system imbalance if their loading behaviours are not properly coordinated and
controlled. These generators and battery storage systems supply energy and ancillary
services which are used for balancing through up or down adjustments of output as required
by the SO for balancing purposes. These services must be compensated for through approved
market mechanisms. It is crucial that these generators are visible to both transmission and
distribution SOs. Properly coordinated operations are essential, and this visibility requires
regulated rules, formalised market mechanisms, and commercial incentives to encourage
behaviour that supports the SO in planning and delivering a stable grid
A Balance Responsible Party (BRP) is an entity that will be held responsible for ensuring
adherence to forecasted supply and/ or demand in the Day Ahead Market (DAM) and thus
maintaining balance between supply and demand to enable system balance.
The BRP must perform the function of forecasting and scheduling generation and/or demand
and then exchanges this data/information with the SO for dispatch. The BRP continues to
monitor performance of its schedules during delivery so that it may reduce imbalances through
rescheduling by participating in intra-day markets – when available, or calling on its ancillary
services, or incur penalties for imbalance as prescribed by the Market Operator.
Initially, balance responsibility will be placed on all generators greater than 10MW and all
registered Market Participants, and then progressively expand to include loads, distributors,
and the balancing of trader portfolios. Ultimately, the balancing mechanism will operate within
the ancillary services market. This will establish learnings and preparation for all other Market
Participants.
2

=== PAGE 4 ===

ENERGY COUNCIL OF SOUTH AFRICA 2025
In a future development, the inclusion of an Intra-day Market will allow for intraday adjustments
to schedules and offered capabilities.
2. What Participants need to Perform as BRPs in SAWEM
a. Forecasting and Bidding Capability
In the day ahead market, each BRP forecasts demand for each of the twenty-four (24) hours
(Trading Periods) of the following day (Dispatch Day) commencing at hour ending 01:00.
Generators and/or traders declare their availability and loads declare their demand for each
of those hours. Accepted market results are exchanged with the SO for delivery the following
day. Each seller and buyer is bound by the dispatch schedule issued by the System Operator
(SO), which specifies the expected generation or consumption levels. Where network
constraints arise, the SO may execute a constrained re-dispatch process. This results in a
revised dispatch schedule that differs from the original unconstrained schedule, based on
localised system limitations.
BRPs must build capacity for accurate forecasting and bidding procedures. Where necessary,
and especially for distributors, load forecasting tools need to be procured, and staff trained in
their use. Generators (IPPs) and traders need accurate whether forecasting tools so that they
are able to predict solar and wind capabilities for the following day. Other generating sources
need access to accurate generation availability figures to limit mismatches between schedules
and actual generation and reduce imbalance penalty charges.
b. Balance Responsibility
At the day ahead trading stage, balance is arrived at through accurate scheduling of
generation and consumption i.e. trading into balance. Initially, due to inexperience, high levels
of inaccuracy are likely with some imbalance penalties being incurred. This may be more
pronounced at LPUs as generators and Traders may have some experience already with their
current bilateral contracts. However, with training and experience, scheduling accuracy will
improve, limiting imbalances and financial risk.
When an intra-day market exists, traders/participants will be able to adjust their schedules a
few hours ahead of delivery and reschedule with the SO. Where a balancing market exists,
traders/participants may also get a last chance to reschedule using locked market prices of
3

=== PAGE 5 ===

ENERGY COUNCIL OF SOUTH AFRICA 2025
unmatched capacities. Rescheduling reduces the amount of imbalance before it occurs.
These two areas of market functionality will be established progressively in future in SAWEM.
It is assumed that balancing will initially operate with a 5% schedule error tolerance and a
fixed penalty tariff will apply, but this will change in future to a market driven penalty tariff.
Generators of 10MW and above, that elect to remain out of the SAWEM, must still be a BRP
that must be approved by the MO and will be liable for imbalance compensation or penalties.
However, their imbalance payment mechanism is not defined at present, so clarity is required
from the MO.
c. Metering
All BRPs must have metering at all points of power exchange so that power flows may be
measured and the data collected and exchanged with all relevant parties that include the SO,
MO, Traders etc. Each metering point must be registered with its locational coordinates. A
procedure for registering and de-registering of meters must be established by the MO and
BRPs must comply with the procedure. They must register their meters.
Network operators (Tx and Dx) are the custodians of metering data as they are the ones who
commission these meters and ensure their conformance to standards. The expectation is that
all the metering data will be exchanged with the MO by network operators. However, the BRPs
must confirm that their meter data is accurate. MO should ask each BRP to do this
confirmation. Unavailability or wrong metering data leads to financial consequences as
participants may be inaccurately billed.
d. Contractual Agreements
BRPs must adhere to the Market Code and be bound to its requirements through the BRP
concluding a Balancing Agreement with the MO (clause 3.4 of Market Code). BRPs must
complete application forms and be admitted before they can operate in the market. A fee may
be charged for processing the application.
e. Transaction Settlement Requirements
BRPs must open trading accounts at the transaction clearing bank nominated by the MO to
enable the MO to move funds and pay for transactions entered into.
4

=== PAGE 6 ===

ENERGY COUNCIL OF SOUTH AFRICA 2025
A Collateral Reserve Account or Trading Clearing Account must be established for Credit
Cover purposes as per item 6. 2 of the Market Code. The applicant shall nominate its credit
cover instrument. The MO must be authorised to move funds to pay for transactions. BRP
must be ready to replenish security account when it has been drawn down lest it be prepared
to be barred from trading.
Each Party must open its operating and credit cover accounts before they may be allowed to
trade. The quantum of credit cover still has to be decided by the MO.
f. Trading Procedures
BRPs need to understand market rules and all trading procedures that include balance
responsibility, and availability submission. Training on the rules and procedures is required to
bring all BRPs to the same level of understanding and prepare them for performing their
individual roles in the market. Without training there will be discordance in the market leading
to disputes and/or system instability. BRPs will be required to attend the Market School
courses to prepare them for their roles.
g. Trading Tools and Technology
BRPs must have systems that are compatible with the MO system, and they must be given
trading codes for them to be able to declare capacities and receive results.
BRPs need reliable telecommunications systems so that they may be able to make
declarations without interruptions. Big BRPs like distributors may need a good SCADA system
for high system visibility and data collection. BRPs need to review their systems for compliance
and close all identified gaps.
h. Capacity building and Trader certification
BRP staff needs to be trained on the functioning and requirements for SAWEM so that they
are prepared for their role in a new market environment. They need to understand the roles
and responsibilities of the entities they will be interacting with and their own roles,
responsibilities and obligations. They will need to understand the market rules and procedures
that apply to each entity. Traders will need to be certified before they can get trading codes
that allow them to submit bids and receive results.
5

=== PAGE 7 ===

ENERGY COUNCIL OF SOUTH AFRICA 2025
Actions to Support BRP Implementation
• Conclude Market Balancing Agreements with the MO
• BPR’s to be trained, certified and receive trading codes from the Market Operator
• Register metering points and ensure compliance with Grid Code metering standards.
• Set up operating and collateral accounts with the Market Bank
• Ensure forecasting and bidding systems are in place and compatible, including
accurate weather forecasting.
• Confirm initial penalty tariff to encourage behaviour that supports system stability and
grid planning.
• Initiate the balancing mechanism through the CPA and Section 34 IPPs to launch
balancing in the Market. Include all other IPP generators above 10MW capacity later.
• Progressively expand to other Market Participants and Distributors.
• Prepare for the inclusion of intra-day markets to allow for adjustments in schedules
and capabilities during the delivery period.
3. Summary of Risks and Readiness Check List
Category Risk Impact Readiness Check List
LPUs IPP Trader
Forecasting
and Bidding
Capability
System
instability
and
imbalance
penalties
due to poor
or lack of
capacity for
accurate
forecasting
and bidding
Market
inefficiency
with
unnecessary
costs
Acquisition of
generation and
load forecasting
tools
Training of staff in
accurate
forecasting and
bidding procedures
Access to accurate
generation
availability figures
Metering Inaccurate
billing due
to non-
conforming
meters
Disputes and
market
distortions
BRPs adhere to
specified metering
standards
Meter identification
and registration
checks
Contractual
Agreements
Inability to
trade if not
admitted by
MO
Financial loss
due to lost
trading
opportunities
BRP to conclude
Balancing
Agreement with
the MO
Transaction
Settlement
Inability to
trade in the
market if
Party does
Financial loss
due to lost
trading
opportunities
Each BRP must
open its operating
and credit cover
accounts
6

=== PAGE 8 ===

ENERGY COUNCIL OF SOUTH AFRICA not have
requisite
operating
and
collateral
accounts
Trading
Procedures
Inefficient
trading in
the market
Discordance
in the market
leading to
inefficient
trading,
disputes
and/or system
instability
Trading
Tools and
Technology
Inefficient
and
inconsisten
t trading in
the market
Inability or
unnecessary
interruptions in
trading
Poor visibility
and data
collection from
network
Capacity
Building
Inability
and/or
inefficient
trading
Financial loss
due to lost
trading
opportunities
MO to decide on
quantum of credit
cover
Training on market
rules and
procedures
Attend market
school
Acquisition of
laptops that are
compatible with the
MO system
Availability of
reliable
telecommunication
s systems
Availability of
SCADA system to
Big BRPs and data
collection
Review systems
for compliance and
close all identified
gaps
Training on roles
and responsibilities
of the entities they
will be interacting
with
Training on
understanding own
roles,
responsibilities and
obligations
Training on
understanding of
market rules and
procedures
Training for
certification to
trade
2025
MO to
execute
MO to
execute
MO to
execute
Yes Yes Yes
7