

=== PAGE 1 ===

ENERGY COUNCIL OF SOUTH AFRICA 2025
Road to SAWEM 2026
The Role of the
Market Participant
Prepared by:
0

=== PAGE 2 ===

ENERGY COUNCIL OF SOUTH AFRICA 2025
Document Control
Document Title SAWEM Concept Note: The Role of the Market
Version 1.0
Date of Latest Update 13 June 2025
Prepared by Energy Council of South Africa
Endorsed by NTCSA tbc
Distribution For stakeholder consultation
Document Status Final
1

=== PAGE 3 ===

ENERGY COUNCIL OF SOUTH AFRICA 2025
The Role of a Market Participant and Compliance Measures
Balance Responsible Parties (BRPs) play a critical role in energy markets as they are
tasked with maintaining a balance between energy production and schedules.
1. The Role of a Market Participant in the Market
According to the Market Code (MC), Market Participant means a Party that has elected and
is compliant to participate in the Day Ahead and Intra-Day Markets within the SAWEM, and is
a BRP for trades carried out on these platforms. This will include all such entities as
generators, distributors, LPUs, and Traders, who will need to complete a number of steps in
compliance with the SAWEM code (regulations). Entities opting not to be a MP will continue
as either a Municipal customer or Eskom direct customer, under the Balancing control of
Eskom Dx.
In the phased market approach, the BRP and the MP are phased in successively, but they
ultimately coincide in their roles in the market. The initial BRP role will extend to all generators
of 10MW or greater capacity regardless of whether or not they elect to be a MP. All MP’s,
however, must be BRPs. The benefit of being an MP is to gain access to lower cost and more
flexible contracting available through the market and in the longer term to potentially offer
ancillary or other services to support SO needs for balancing, capacity and green credits.
An MP performs several key functions:
• Sending generation or demand bids to the Market Operator (MO) for bid matching.
• Receiving final schedules from the MO, which are shared with the SO for dispatch.
• Monitoring schedule performance during delivery and reducing imbalances through
intra-day market participation or ancillary services - although these functionalities may
not be available at launch.
• Handling after-the-fact accounting of imbalances and paying or receiving payments
based on the MO's determinations.
Market participants may or may not be eligible for regulation capacity payments from the MO.
Such payments, outlined in Market Code 13, apply to generators eligible under the balancing
mechanism. This will only apply once the balancing price mechanism is operationalised which
2

=== PAGE 4 ===

ENERGY COUNCIL OF SOUTH AFRICA 2025
likely will not happen from day one of market operations. Payments will apply to generators
and loads that can be curtailed according to the Market Code’s definition.
2. What Participants need to Perform as MPs in SAWEM
a. Forecasting and Bidding Capability
A number of MP activities will be directly related to balancing. In the day ahead market, each
MP forecasts demand for each of the twenty-four (24) hours (Trading Periods) of the following
day (Dispatch Day) commencing at hour ending 01:00 and terminating at hour ending 24:00
(Market Code 9.4). Generators and/or traders declare their availability and prices for each of
those hours together with unit flexibility capabilities (e.g. provision of reserves). They submit
hourly bids for their available volumes (MW) and the prices (R/MWh) they are prepared to
accept into the market.
Buyers (LPUs and/or Traders) submit hourly bids with their required volumes and prices they
are prepared to pay. These shall be submitted to the MO by 10:00 on the day before dispatch
(delivery) day.
Indicative schedules for six days following the dispatch day shall also be submitted (market
code 9.0). The MO runs a bid matching process to discover an unconstrained clearing price
and clearing volume at the crossing point of supply and demand curves.
All matched participants will pay for their volumes at the market clearing price (MCP) and
results are shared with bidders. When accepted, a schedule is shared by the MO with the SO
for delivery the following day. Each seller and each buyer are bound by the dispatch schedule
given to the SO to generate or withdraw power at the given rates (MW/MWh).
MPs must build capacity for accurate forecasting and bidding procedures. Where necessary,
and especially for distributors, load forecasting tools need to be procured, and staff get trained
in their use. Generators (IPPs) and traders need accurate weather forecasting tools so that
they are able to predict solar and wind capabilities for the following day. Other generating
sources need access to accurate generation availability figures in order to limit mismatches
between schedules and actual generation and reduce imbalance penalty charges.
3

=== PAGE 5 ===

ENERGY COUNCIL OF SOUTH AFRICA 2025
b. Information Exchange
Effective communication and data exchange between MPs, MOs, and SOs are critical for
smooth market operations and accurate scheduling, operational stability, and financial
settlement. This is done accordance with Market Codes 7.3 to 7.6 and includes plant, network,
metering, banking, trading identifiers of units and traders, trading unit capabilities, fuel
resource position and unit production limitations amongst other data.
When there are changes to such data, MPs are required to notify the MO. If this data is not
exchanged in reasonable time an MP may not be able to trade in the market. Data exchange
includes demand forecasts from their customers, coordinating generation and consumption
positions to submit balanced bids, and exchanging operational data to reduce imbalance risks.
c. Metering
All MPs must have metering at all points of power exchange (Points of Delivery) so that power
flows may be measured and the data collected and exchanged with all relevant parties that
include the SO, MO, Traders etc. Each metering point must be registered with its locational
coordinates. A procedure for registering and de-registering of meters must be established by
the MO and MPs must comply with the procedure. They must register their meters.
The metering standards must comply with grid code standards and must be certified for use.
Main and check meters are normally required. MPs must ensure that their meters meet the
required standards. Unavailability or wrong metering data leads to financial consequences as
participants may be inaccurately billed.
d. Contractual Agreements
MPs must adhere to the Market Code and be bound to its requirements through the MP
concluding a Market Participant Agreement with the Market Operator to facilitate trade with
the MO (clause 3.4 of Market Code). MPs must complete application forms and be admitted
before they can operate in the market. A fee may be charged for processing the application.
e. Transaction Settlement Requirements
4

=== PAGE 6 ===

ENERGY COUNCIL OF SOUTH AFRICA 2025
MPs must open trading accounts at the transaction clearing bank (Market Bank) nominated
by the MO to enable the MO to move funds and pay for transactions entered into.
MPs must open both operating and collateral accounts and nominate a credit cover instrument
acceptable to the MO as per item 6. 2 of the Market Code. The applicant shall nominate its
credit cover instrument. The MO must be authorised to move funds to pay for transactions.
MP must be ready to replenish security account when it has been drawn down lest it be
prepared to be barred from trading.
Each Party must open its operating and credit cover accounts before they may be allowed to
trade. The quantum of credit cover still has to be decided by the MO.
f. Trading Procedures
MPs need to understand market rules and all trading procedures that include balance
responsibility, bid submission and transaction settlement. Training on the rules and
procedures is required to bring all participants to the same level of understanding and prepare
them for performing their individual roles in the market. Without training there will be
discordance in the market leading to inefficient trading, disputes and/or system instability.
g. Trading Tools and Technology
MPs must have systems that are compatible with the MO system, and they must be given
trading codes for them to be able to enter bids and receive results.
MPs need reliable telecommunications systems so that they may be able to trade without
interruptions. Large MPs like distributors may need a good SCADA system for high system
visibility and data collection. MPs need to review their systems for compliance and close all
identified gaps.
h. Capacity building and Trader certification
MP staff needs to be trained on the functioning and requirements for SAWEM so that they are
prepared for their role in a new market environment. They need to understand the roles and
responsibilities of the entities they will be interacting with and their own roles, responsibilities
5

=== PAGE 7 ===

ENERGY COUNCIL OF SOUTH AFRICA 2025
and obligations. They will need to understand the market rules and procedures that apply to
each entity. Traders will need to be certified before they can get trading codes that allow them
to submit bids and receive results. Participants will be required to attend the Market School
courses to prepare them for their roles.
Next steps for entities to consider in preparation for becoming a Market Participant
1. Each entity to decide on whether or not to qualify as a MP. If so, specify the role it will play
in the market (e.g., generator, LPU, trader, not participate)
2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. Submit required technical and company information (plant, units, fuel, identifiers, etc.)
Conclude Market Participant and Balancing Agreements with the MO
Traders to be trained, certified and receive trading codes from the Market Operator
Register metering points and ensure compliance with Grid Code metering standards
Set up operating and collateral accounts with the Market Bank
Ensure forecasting and bidding systems are in place and compatible, including accurate
weather forecasting.
8. 9. Build capacity for effective information exchange and coordination with the MO and SO.
Prepare and test day-ahead bids and participating in the market
10. Prepare for the inclusion of intra-day markets to allow for adjustments in forecasts and
capabilities during the delivery period.
3. Summary of Risks and Readiness Chek List
Category Risk Impact Readiness Check List
LPUs IPP Trader
Forecasting
and Bidding
Capability
System
instability
and
imbalance
penalties due
to poor or
lack of
capacity for
accurate
forecasting
and bidding
Market
inefficiency
with
unnecessary
costs
Acquisition of
generation and load
forecasting tools
Training of staff in
accurate forecasting
and bidding
procedures
Access to accurate
generation
availability figures
Metering Inaccurate
billing due to
non-
conforming
meters
Disputes and
market
distortions
MPs adhere to
specified metering
standards
Meter identification
and registration
6

=== PAGE 8 ===

ENERGY COUNCIL OF SOUTH AFRICA Contractual
Agreements
Inability to
trade if not
admitted by
MO
Financial loss
due to lost
trading
opportunities
Transaction
Settlement
Inability to
trade in the
market if
Party does
not have
requisite
operating
and collateral
accounts
Financial loss
due to lost
trading
opportunities
Trading
Procedures
Inefficient
trading in the
market
Discordance in
the market
leading to
inefficient
trading,
disputes
and/or system
instability
Trading
Tools and
Technology
Inefficient
and
inconsistent
trading in the
market
Inability or
unnecessary
interruptions in
trading
Poor visibility
and data
collection from
network
Capacity
Building
Inability
and/or
inefficient
trading
Financial loss
due to lost
trading
opportunities
2025
MP to conclude
Market Participant
Agreement with the
MO
Each MP must open
its operating and
credit cover
accounts
MO to decide on
quantum of credit
cover
Mo to execute
Training on market
rules and
procedures
Attend market
school
Acquisition of
systems that are
compatible with the
MO system
Availability of
reliable
telecommunications
systems
Availability of
SCADA system to
Big MPs and data
collection
Review systems for
compliance and
close all identified
gaps
Training on roles
and responsibilities
of the entities they
will be interacting
with
Training on
understanding own
roles,
responsibilities and
obligations
Training on
understanding of
market rules and
procedures
Training for
certification to trade
7